[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
[Applause]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> Tracy, we're recording this August 26th,
2025. There's a lot going on right now,
particularly in I guess many big
questions about macro and governance and
all kinds of things in some of the
richest countries in the world.
>> That is certainly one way to put it. So
just overnight we had headlines saying
that Trump was going to fire Lisa Cook
from the Fed.
>> And this obviously fits into the whole
debate around central bank independence
and how much influence governments
should actually have on central banks.
And it turns out this is a debate that
we've had before in other countries.
>> Totally. And part of the reason I think
Trump is focused on the Fed is the high
level of interest payments and he'd like
to see them come down. Speaking of
interest payments, this morning I saw
the headline that the UK 30-year guilt
is like at the highest since 1989. It
continues to elevate. So for all the
stress that we have here, all the fiscal
pressure, inflationary pressure, it
actually seems potentially worse
elsewhere. Although yes,
>> I will say the pound is up against the
dollar, right? So from a currency
perspective, we're kind of doing worse
>> from a currency uh perspective, but
there's a lot these things are global is
I think the point and all of these
anxieties and stresses, it's not just a
US story.
>> No. And obviously it's feeding into bond
markets and I cannot tell you how many
notes we get on a daily basis about how
governments can reduce the debt, how
they deal with deficits and things like
that. Right now, everyone's talking
about this these days here in 2025. It
got a lot of interest, of course, in
2022 after there was a famous spike in
yields in UK guilts and maybe this sort
of premonition of what a lot of rich
countries would be dealing with. So, I'm
very excited to say we really do have
the perfect guest to speak about all of
this today to understand some of the
pressures facing rich developed
economies. We're speaking with the right
honorable Liz Truss, former prime
minister of the UK, author of the recent
book 10 years to save the West. Liz
Truss, thank you so much for coming on
OddLots. Thrilled to have you here.
>> Good to be on.
>> I have a question. You know, when you
see like 30-year guilt yields higher
substantially than when you were the
prime minister and when everyone
attacked you over the mini budget, do
you feel some sense of like sort of
vindication or happiness or is it all
like despair for the state of your
country? Well, I do feel despair for the
state of my country and it's in fact why
I tried to do what I tried to do in 2022
because I could see the way things were
going. I could see our economy was
stagnant, that the tax revenue being
generated wasn't enough to cover the
amount of money the state was spending.
And we needed to do something different
in order to get out of a negative
spiral. And what I see now is we're
further down that negative spiral and we
are heading for a very very serious
crisis. I said last year I thought we
were headed for an IMF bailout as
Britain experienced in the 1970s. I
think that's even truer now than it was
a year ago. And we're in an economic
doom loop of higher taxes, lower growth,
higher debt. And it's very difficult now
to see the political way out of that.
>> So how should governments actually
announce or unveil largecale policy
shifts? Because there does seem to be a
some institutional constraint and then b
the market reaction. We saw that this
year in the US after Trump's liberation
day announcement. You know a lot of
people were saying this was Trump's
trust moment. How should governments
actually go about I guess balancing the
views of the market with you know big
scale change in terms of policy? I think
the issue that I faced and it is also
the issue that Donald Trump faces in the
United States is a lot of the mainstream
economic establishment do not agree with
the policies that I was pursuing and
they don't agree with the policies that
Donald Trump is pursuing. So you're
operating in a hostile environment. In
the UK's case, we have institutions that
have become very divorced from
government policy. In 1998, the Bank of
England was made independent by Gordon
Brown. Since then, I believe it has been
pretty much unaccountable. So,
politicians have very little control
over monetary policy. And what has
happened is monetary policy has driven
fiscal policy. It's very hard to
coordinate between those two policies as
a government because you don't have
control of the levers. Even more so,
back in 2010, George Osborne established
the Office of Budget Responsibility,
which handed over huge powers to another
unelected authority. It's a bit like the
Congressional Budget Office, but it has
more power within the British system. So
what I was facing back in 2022
was
powerful institutions that didn't share
my policy objectives. Now I believed as
the democratically selected leader of
the country that I should be able to
pursue those policies. It was what I was
elected on. In fact, it was what the
Conservative Party elected on. But what
I faced was resistance. So when you're
talking about timing of policy
announcements, it's not like you're
operating on a
a clear sea. You're operating in a
stormy sea where there are people out
there who want you to fail. Not just
your political opponents, but also the
institutional opponents. And that is
what Donald Trump faced with his tariff
policies that he announced on Liberation
Day. A lot of economists said they
wouldn't work. A lot of people say said
it would make the budget deficits in the
US worse and those policy makers are
very influential with the markets. So in
the case of the bank of England or the
case of the people sitting on the
Federal Reserve or civil servants within
the Treasury, these people are out there
creating their own waves. So I think
that's the context you have to see what
I was trying to do. First of all, I
totally take your point about the sort
of limitations of many mainstream
economists, the bias of many mainstream
economists, and we have many critics of
mainstream economics regularly on the
show. So, that's a point well taken.
When you unveiled your mini budget,
given the fiscal constraints or the
perceived fiscal constraints, why tax
cuts specifically and not also spending
cuts? You know, there's so many
different aspects of the UK spending
situation, whether it's the triple lock
pension. There's this thing that goes
viral on Twitter a lot about like how
easy it is to get a free car, etc. Like,
why not first take aim at potentially
lowhanging fruit or at least in
combination, you know, spending cuts.
>> Well, that is exactly what I sought to
do. The package we were putting forward
was a combination. It was actually not
tax cuts. it was reversing a tax rise.
And I think that's a very important
distinction. The biggest measure we
wanted to take was keeping corporation
tax at 19%, not raising it to 25%. And I
believed, and I've since been proven
right, that if you raise corporation tax
to that level, you get less business
activity, you get lower growth, combined
with the non-dom tax that's been put in
place or the removal of the non-dom
benefits. We've seen more millionaires
leave Britain than any other country in
the world per capita. So what we were
doing just on its own account, raising
taxes at that juncture back in 2022 was
a bad idea. I believe that it would lead
to lower economic growth and a higher
deficit in the long term. And some
economists agreed with me, but the
economists working for the government,
the office of budget responsibility of
the bank of England did not agree with
me and they were keen on that policy and
in fact they forced me to reverse that
policy. So that's one point. Second
point on spending is we did try to rein
in spending. So a particular thing I
sought to do was increase welfare by
wages not prices because we were in a
very high inflation year in 2022. That
would have saved 7 billion pounds on the
government budget which is a significant
amount. What I found was that
Conservative MPs were not prepared to
vote for that. So even a relatively
minor change which was simply not
raising welfare as much as it was going
to be raised created a massive outcry on
on the conservative benches. So the
answer on spending is it was politically
not possible. Now personally I would
have liked to be even tougher on
spending. I think we could have done
that over time but I had to think about
what was politically realistic. And so
what we had is spending constraint, not
raising spending as much as was
previously planned, keeping taxes low
rather than raising them and choking off
economic growth, which is what I thought
it would do and was what actually
happened. And then also supply side
measures such as legalizing fracking in
the UK, making it easier to drill in the
North Sea so that you stimulate the
economy with supply side reforms. That
was the overall package and you know
what happened and you can compare my
fiscal package with packages that Richie
Sunnak did during COVID or packages that
Rachel Ree did since. My package was
smaller even according to the estimates
of the office of budget responsibility.
And yet it got a very different
reaction. And this is because the
economic establishment, the key figures
in the Treasury and the Bank of England
have a bias towards a more Keynesian
approach. So I I I think it's important
to note that this this fiscal package
was not any bigger than packages before
or after. It just got a different
reaction. I think the other the other
important point to note about what
happened in September and October 2022
is the night before the mini budget, the
Bank of England announced the sale of 40
billion pounds worth of guilts. So I had
a central bank who were making
announcements that made our lives a lot
more difficult the day before the mini
budget. And since the guilt spike in
2022, the Bank of England have actually
produced a paper saying that 2/3 of that
spike in guilts was down to their
failure to regulate the pensions market.
So there were lots of other things going
on at the same time, but it was very
very convenient for the mini budget to
be blamed for what happened. And as you
pointed out at the beginning of the
show, the guilt spike wasn't as high as
it is now. So what I think is going on
now is you can see the different
treatment of a tax spending,
high-spending
Labor government from a conservative
politician who's trying to pursue, in my
view, laugher, curb friendly tax
freezes,
supply side reforms, and spending
restraint.
If there's an institutional and market
bias towards economic orthodoxy or
Keynesianism as you just pointed out,
why not try to adapt your budget or your
economic policy to that reality? Because
it it did seem like, you know, you were
sort of expecting the markets to adapt
to your policy rather than vice versa. I
guess I'm asking is just is there a
better way to try to communicate what
you were doing at the time?
Well, I'm a believer in democracy and I
think it's democratically elected
politicians that should decide policy,
not unelected central banks. And you
know, there is a network, there's the
IMF, the World Bank, the central banks
meeting regularly. They are far too
powerful in my view at deciding what
country's economic policy should be and
they have not been effective. You know,
if you look at the Bank of England's
record over the past 10 years on things
like inflation, on economic growth, it's
been extremely poor. And I
fundamentally, you know, why should
democratically elected politicians
cow to what unelected officials want
when we're the people who are held to
account for the success of failures of
the policy? And what is happening now is
Rachel Reeves is very orthodox. She's a
former Bank of England employee. She's
essentially taking dictation from the
Bank of England and the Treasury about
what she should do. And we can see the
results of that. And it what is
happening is we are going to reach an
end point where the country runs out of
money and then we will have a major
crisis and we will have to think
differently. I just think it's very sad
it's got to that point. This was obvious
from where we were in 2022,
but as I've said, the economic orthodoxy
proved very powerful. And frankly, what
is the point of wanting to become prime
minister if you're simply going to go
along with the failing orthodoxy that
has put your country in the problems it
is already, which is where we were. You
know, you mentioned that the Bank of
England wasn't really independent from
HM Treasury until Gordon Brown's
chancellorship in the 1990s. Do you
think that arrangement still works or
would you perhaps call for reform where
maybe the Treasury regains some of its
influence over the central bank?
>> I think the Bank of England needs to be
accountable to politicians. I think the
current system doesn't work. This is why
I'm very sympathetic to what Donald
Trump is saying about the Fed. it.
Monetary policy is incredibly important.
It determines the allocation of assets
within society. You know, what we've
seen in Britain is we've seen people who
have, you know, property, who have
capital
out of the low interest rates that the
Bank of England and the easy money the
Bank of England has created over the
past 15 years. And we're seeing young
people struggle to get on the housing
market. We are seeing it real effects in
the economy of the Bank of England's
policies. And as a Democrat, you
somebody that believes in democracy, I
just think it's wrong that people should
be making those decisions and not
accountable to the electorate. And it's
also very difficult, as I found as prime
minister, to combine fiscal and monetary
policy if you don't hold one of the
levers. So yes, I think it's got to
change. And I think there is a reckoning
coming for the central banks, not just
in Britain, but also in the United
States, also the ECB. The current system
does not work. And I think one of the
reasons that the Bank of England, I
would say, sabotaged what I was trying
to do is I was a critic of central banks
before I became prime minister. I'd been
very clear that I thought the Bank of
England's record was not good, that the
Treasury should have much more of a role
in setting the mandate for the Bank of
England and they didn't like their power
being challenged.
[Music]
First of all, I want to say I think your
point about the sort of the political
impossibility of or the political at
least difficulty of spending cuts is
really important and the fact that you
had the Tory majority obviously and even
what you describe as sort of modest cuts
to the rate of growth spending couldn't
get the votes like I think there's a
very telling issue and raises a stress
about the ability of any democracies to
do difficult things. Setting aside maybe
what's politically capable in the next
parliament should the next parliament
revisit questions such as either the
triple lock pensions or free point of
use at the NHS.
>> So just on your point about political
possibility I think the only thing that
is politically possible at present or
certainly was in 2022 was to try and
restrain the growth of spending
>> and to grow the economy faster than
that. And I think that is what
>> that is what the Trumpite strategy is in
the US. You've got to outpace
>> the growth of public spending.
>> Sure.
>> With economic growth.
>> I think that is only possible what
you've just said about actually spending
cuts.
>> Yeah.
>> Is when there is some kind of crisis.
>> Well, so this is what I'm saying. So you
mentioned you said last year that you
were worried that the UK could need
another IMF bailout. There were
headlines I think in the news just in
the last week of some economists talking
about that again. Okay, like if this is
what we're talking about, I mean, if
this is real and we're talking about the
UK essentially being at the point of
needing an IMF bailout, is it time to
look at these sort of core pillars of
existing spending levels? Well, you can
see what's been going on in parliament,
which is the Labor Party tried to put
through some modest welfare cuts and
there was a massive rebellion by Labor
MPs. Even though they have a huge
majority in parliament, they could not
get through some pretty minor changes.
Smaller by the way, than the amount I
was proposing in 2022,
>> I think it was only worth about4 billion
pounds. They could not get that through
their current parliamentary party and
all of the evidence you know what
happened in Greece, what happened in
Ireland where spending cut programs have
been achieved or Argentina is another
good example have come after a crisis. I
think that's deeply regrettable but I
can't see certainly with the current
parliament serious spending cuts
happening until until Britain runs out
of money. I'm going to ask Joe's
question just in a slightly different
way, but if you were back in government
today and guilt yields are where they
are, what specific tradeoffs between
spending and taxes, tax cuts would you
be willing to make? And what trade-offs
do you think are actually politically
realistic? Well, the issue now is that
taxes have got so high that they're
choking off economic growth and we're
seeing millionaires leaving the country.
We're seeing businesses closing down.
I think the easiest thing and the most
sensible thing to do straight away is
all the supply side stuff. Abolishing
planning regulations, taking on the
environmental NOS's, getting on with
fracking, using North Sea oil, maybe
using our coal reserves. I think those
are the types of things that can be done
relatively quickly and would have an
impact.
In terms of spending,
of course, our welfare state needs to be
reformed. I think something like over
60% of Britain's budget is a combination
of the National Health Service and
welfare. And those are the two areas
that need to be fixed. But I don't think
there's any room for maneuver now on
taxes.
>> Mhm. I think that raising taxes has
proved already to be counterproductive.
Doing it even more will simply make the
UK even more unattractive for investors.
So, you've got to focus on supply side,
make it much easier to build things,
make it much easier to frack, make it
much easier to hire people, all of those
kind of things. And you have to have
spending cuts where you can. But, as
I've said, I've tried myself to get
spending cuts through parliament. It's
It's not easy.
>> I'm gonna ask a really ignorant American
question that sometime so forgive me if
this comes off as blunt. I just so I'm
just getting it out there, but is there
a cult at the NHS in the UK?
>> There has been I think the cult is
wearing thin,
>> but you know there has been a cult. I
think people are recognizing though that
the outcomes are not good. you know if
you compare British health outcomes with
other countries I don't think the
American system is anything to aspire to
but if you look at countries like
Germany
>> no one disagrees with you there
>> if you look at countries like Germany
France Japan you know they managed to
achieve better outcomes with similar
levels of funding so I think everybody
in Britain recognizes that it's not
working as it's currently constituted
but it is It's such a big and deep issue
to resolve. It really is.
>> Joe, remind me to tell you my NHS horror
story later on.
>> Everyone has one.
>> Everyone has one. On the plus side, it's
free. Right.
>> Right. Right.
>> All right. You know, I want to go back
to
>> It cost you It costs you in other ways.
>> True. That's what I would say.
>> True. I want to go back to something you
said about the economic orthodoxy uh
leaning towards Keynesianism. Why do you
think that is? Like why is that the
dominant economic policy framework at
the moment given that as you keep
pointing out you know a lot of people
would argue that it hasn't actually
yielded good outcomes for the developed
world in the 80s we had some very
successful supply side policies both
thatcher and Reagan increased economic
growth increased the strength of our
respective economies and when the Soviet
Union collapsed I think we all thought
free market capitalism had won. Low
taxes, restrained spending, supply side
economics.
And I think people in favor of those
policies took their foot off the pedal
and that allowed
more left-wing economics to gain
traction. And since then I think we've
seen it in universities in the Treasury
in the Bank of England but the Keynesian
economics has become much more prevalent
and whether it's the office of budget
responsibility or the CBO they're
looking at economics through a Keynesian
lens and I think it is a big question
about how on earth after seeing the
success of those policies and now seeing
the failure of Keynesian policies,
anyone could possibly think these
policies are right. But they've proved
very hard to shift. And I think the left
of politics have been very successful at
capturing institutions. I think they've
captured large parts of the bureaucracy,
the universities, large parts of the
media. you know there was you know in
Britain
there has not you know just talking
about these the events of 2022
there's not been real analysis of what
happened and what the bank of England
did and how the institutions behaved you
it's something that is not talked about
and I think the level of economic
literacy in the media is also got lower
and certainly British politics just gets
reported as a pantomime time rather than
an analysis of the issues.
>> There's much you say about the media and
the way reporting is done that I
probably am quite sympathetic with
actually. Would you ever join reform? If
the conservatives can't p modest
slowdowns in the pace of welfare
increases if you know labor obviously
has its issue issues, would you join
reform?
I'm not really thinking about party
politics at the moment because my whole
experience of being in government and I
was a government minister for 10 years
before I became prime minister was that
the power was not in the hands of the
politicians the h power was in the hands
of the bureaucrats. So even if Nigel
Farage gets elected in 2029, and
currently he's the bookie's favorite to
get elected,
if the bureaucracy isn't changed, if
there isn't fundamental change to the
way Britain is run, nothing will alter.
I mean, a lot of
>> presumably presumably a break up of the
I mean, right, like that's the idea,
right? There's no prospect of breaking
up the bureaucracy unless there's like
genuinely something new that happens
politically. Like that would be their
argument, right? that a brand new party
taking power is the only way that there
could be some sort of deep institutional
shakeup.
>> Yes, in some ways that's true or could
be true. There's no reason why the
Conservative Party couldn't do a deep
institutional shakeup. But the
Conservative Party has to acknowledge
what went wrong for 14 years. You know,
why didn't we solve the immigration
problem? Why didn't we solve the growth
problem? Why didn't we solve things like
the free speech problem? The answer is
we didn't reverse the institutional
changes Tony Blair made. And I talked
about how he made the Bank of England
unaccountable. He also made the
judiciary unaccountable with things like
the Human Rights Act and the
Constitutional Reform Act. So until the
Conservatives acknowledge that that is
why we failed to deliver in office, that
is true about the Conservative Party.
But if you look at the two Trump
administrations, Trump one and Trump 2,
you know, in Trump one,
there was less recognition of the
institutional change that was required
in the US and we're now seeing more of
that from Trump. So my point is whoever
is in office in 2029 needs to understand
that the British state needs to be
fundamentally shaken up otherwise
nothing is going to happen. And I make
that argument to all parties.
Interestingly there are even people in
the Labour party backbench MPs who are
saying the Bank of England's
independence needs to be removed.
They're saying get rid of the office of
budget responsibility because they can
see the types of policies they want
pursued are not possible with the
current setup. Since we're talking
political parties and on this note, you
know, there maybe there is some
consensus on specific economic policies
as you point out, but we've had this
back and forth between conservatives and
labor for many, many years now. How do
you actually go about building consensus
around economic policy especially at a
time when you know people would describe
our current environment as relatively
turbulent and guilt yields are where
they are. I would say there's a bad
economic consensus between Labor and the
Conservatives at present which is nobody
is saying apart from me and a few others
nobody is saying that the institutions
need to change. The Conservative party
are also wrapping themselves in we need
to respect the independent bank of
England. We need to listen to the Office
of Budget Responsibility. They're not
prepared to take on the economic
establishment. neither are the Labor
Party and it we're in a situation where
the policies these institutions believe
in
are failing and they're manifestally
failing. Guilt rates are now much higher
than they were back in 2022.
Unemployment is up. Our energy prices
are the highest in the world and the
industry is closing down. These policies
are manifestly failing. yet nobody is
challenging
the fundamentals of the economic
institutions.
>> You know, I'm glad you brought up free
speech because I'm interested in that as
well. And of course, you know, again, in
the West, I think free speech, liberal
speech norms are good and so I worry
about when I see them failing in various
countries or friends and neighbors.
Palestine Action seems like a bunch of
like crusty old hippies and I know they
defaced a plane, but they're listed as a
terrorist group in your country. People
can get arrested even just for saying
support them. And I think they're like a
terrorist group basically like on the
same level of as like ISIS, which I
think most people say, yes, that is a
genuine terrorist group. Like what is
going on there?
>> Well, they did attack a military base
and they are advocating for terrorism in
the UK.
They deface a plane but and then also
people get arrested or in trouble for
saying that they support them.
>> They are clearly a problematic
organization and there are lots of
organizations in Britain that are
allowed in the UK that aren't actually
allowed in many Arab countries. So I
think it's right that we crack down on
these organizations.
I do think when people, you know, I am a
pro- free speech person. I'd love to
have the First Amendment here in
Britain. I support both people I agree
with and people I don't agree with
having a lot more free speech. And it is
a travesty that we've just seen Lucy
Connley released from jail who put out a
tweet, deleted it four hours later and
was sentenced to 31 months in prison.
You know, that that is absolutely
ludicrous. And I think we become an
international laughingstock. And it is
an attempt and K star was very clear
about this. It is an attempt by the
authorities to suppress what people are
talking about. And I think that's a very
dangerous thing for a society for a
society to go down.
>> All of these things really worry worry
me in the Lucy Connelly example. So she
she tweeted and I understand that she
deleted it, but she tweeted about
setting a hotel on fire. I mean that is
arguably a call to violent action. Like
how would that be different? Would you
feel the same way if someone said like,
you know, we should set a synagogue on
fire? Is that free speech?
>> Well, I think what she said would not
have been deemed a violation in the US
because it wasn't I don't believe she
was talking about a specific, you know,
go out and do this now. It was a general
statement. It was obviously a terrible
thing to say and she has said sorry for
that. I think there's a question about
whether or not in the US that would have
even been a crime at all. And even if it
is a crime, whether it merits a 31 month
prison sentence when we have people
caught with child pornography being let
off with no jail time at all. I mean,
you probably heard the expression
two-tier Britain, but what is happening
is people are being let out very early
for crimes like child rape and yet put
in prison for
things that they write on Twitter. And
those are two different categories in my
opinion.
>> You mentioned the first amendment just
then. How would you reform I guess
speech rights in the UK if you were in
power again?
you we came up with free speech, freedom
of the press back in 1695
and it was a historic British liberty.
We had the bill of rights of course 1689
which then the United States you know
built on that with your bill of rights
and so on. So these liberties are there
in the British Constitution. The problem
is all of the laws that have been passed
since most notably the online safety
act. What we need to do is restore
Britain's historic liberties with a
great restoration bill that sweeps away
all of this legislation that is tied the
country in knots. And I've talked about,
you know, our problematic institutions,
the problems with the judiciary, the
problems with free speech. This is all
down to very poor quality legislation
that is essentially handed power that
used to sit in the hands of the
individual British citizen or the
British Parliament. It's handed those
power to unelected bureaucrats.
[Music]
Basically my entire professional career,
your party has been in power except for,
you know, the last 10 minutes or so when
uh Labor and Kirst
>> it doesn't feel like 10 minutes here.
>> Okay. Maybe it just feels like it over
here because it feels like a lot of the
rot you describe or what the rot that
you perceive in your country almost so
much of it seems to have taken place
under conservative government. Why is
that? And why would anyone you know and
they're thinking about the next
election. Why would anyone think that if
there so much rot was allowed to happen
under the Tories that the Tories should
be given another chance in power?
>> So I think the rot has sort of built up
over time. So I talked about the
development of the permanent
bureaucracy. You had the Atly government
which socialized land which created the
NHS which created the welfare state. A
lot of our problems go back to that
government. But what was very important
about the Blair government is this
taking power that was in the hands of
Parliament and putting it in the hands
of unelected
bodies, bureaucracies, the Bank of
England, the Judicial Appointments
Commission, all of this plethora of
people offcom who are now making the
decisions about free speech. These
plethora of people have not been elected
now de facto run our country. And the
big mistake the Conservative party made
was not reversing that. And this was
because at the time David Cameron said
he wanted to be the heir to Blair, you
know, he wanted to be fashionable. The
Conservatives wanted to be modern. But I
think it was a huge error and the
Conservative Party lost its soul. That's
what happened in the pursuit of power,
in the pursuit of trying to be modern.
The Conservative Party lost its soul.
And I think it's an open question about
whether or not the Conservative Party
can get its soul back or be replaced.
But certainly,
you know, where we are now, not enough
people are saying what really went wrong
over those 14 years. But the
Conservative Party failed to take on the
bureaucracy. These were not the
Conservative Party's policies. they were
just policies that we didn't object to.
>> Related to Joe's point, when you you
think back to certain moments in
Britain's economic history, so for
instance, Brexit, the argument then was
that if we get rid of all this EU
regulation, the UK economy will be free
to flourish and prosper. And I think in
the 1970s, you know, Anthony Barber
instituted some tax cuts as well, right
before inflation hit, I think 25% or
something like that. Why should the UK
population have confidence that a growth
focused economic policy, one that
features, you know, big tax cuts and
deregulation, will actually drive
economic growth? Well, I think the
important thing to note about about
Brexit is we haven't got rid of any of
those European laws. They're still on
the British statute books. So, laws that
protect bats and nutes still on the
statute books. Laws that tell you how
your can opener should work are still on
the statute books. We still have the
working time directive. It we still got
all of those laws. So, this goes back to
the problem you were talking about the
Conservative Party. The Conservative
Party is fundamentally split between
people who want Britain to be, you know,
Singapore on terms, you know, a free
trading, you know, go getting country
and people who want it to be part of
Europe and want to be part of the, you
know, European lots of labor laws
protecting people, you know,
environmental red tape, all of that
stuff. And that issue was never resolved
within the Conservative Party, which is
why, you know, you saw prime ministers
being deposed, why you have the debate
within the Conservative Party. And I
think if you look at the Brexit vote in
Britain, 52% voted for Brexit, 48%
didn't. So Brexit was not delivered as
the public intended. I mean the biggest
case in point is of course immigration
where the Boris Johnson government
failed to in fact allowed immigration to
increase huge amounts which has had a
very negative effect. You know, since
you mentioned party politics in the UK
and the split within the Conservative
Party, again, ignorant question here. I
do get the impression that the
Conservatives just like all seem to hate
each other more than the members of the
Labor Party and the 1922 committee,
which I still like have to Wikipedia
every once in a while to remember what
that is. And they're always like
scheming against each other. Is there
like a deeper culture of just internal
hate in the Conservative Party than the
Labor Party? I would say I would say the
problems of the Conservative party go
back to where Margaret Thatcher was
defenistrated
and the sort of Tory wets and the you
know the Thatcherites. But if you
compare it to American politics you know
if you look at the split between people
like Trump and people like Dick Cheney
or the sort of Bush Republicans it's a
very similar
>> ideological divide. But what is
different in America is that Trump has
basically taken over the Republican
party whereas in Britain the kind of the
left of the conservative party are still
in control of it. That's the difference.
>> But there is going to be a political
realignment and you can see it in
America. Yeah.
>> You know, Republicans are now getting
votes from lowincome people, people in
rural areas. you the Democrats are
dominating in the sort of liberal
cities.
>> That's exactly what's going to happen in
Britain at the next election. It's just
the Conservative Party hasn't really got
its head around which of those two
things it is.
>> So, one of the things that seems to be
happening in many developed countries at
the moment is everyone wants to boost
their own domestic manufacturing sector.
And I believe you've spoken about the
need for this in the UK before. When I
think about the British economy, I
usually think there's a pretty big
monopoly when it comes to, let's call
it, intellectual jobs,
>> services, finance, office, and
journalism. Yeah,
>> that kind of thing. But when I think
about British manufacturing, you know,
it's it's an island with a relatively
small population compared to some other
places in the world and high taxes, as
you've been pointing out. What would
make Britain actually competitive when
it comes to manufacturing at a time when
everyone seems out to uh compete in the
same field?
>> Well, the number one thing is energy
prices need to come down. You know,
they're the highest in the world.
They're four times the United States. If
you are a car manufacturer, a steel
manufacturer, it's incredibly hard to
compete. So, that's that has to change.
We have to make it much easier to build
things in Britain. if you want to build
a new factory, it takes far too long.
So, there are all of those sort of
supply side policies that need to
change. I think Britain, we
de-industrialized pretty much earlier
than any other country. You can see the
same thing now happening in Germany and
continental Europe. I think it's
important to do all you can to maintain
a manufacturing base because a lot of
industries like AI for example requires
high levels of energy. It requires other
industries that it can sort of feed off
if you like. So if you just become I I
talked about Singapore and TESS earlier
but Singapore is a relatively small
country so it can afford to be a trading
hub. Britain is a country of 70 million
people. I think you can't rely on
services alone. I think you have to
produce the full gamut. I'm very worried
that we're losing our last steel blast
furnace. Yeah. What we learned during co
is you are seriously up against it if
you are relying on you know China for
pharmaceuticals.
These are the types of industry that
Britain can excel in and does excel in.
I mean our biggest manufactured export
to the United States is cars. We do
produce good high-end cars that people
want to buy. So there are opportunities
for British manufacturing. It's just
been made very very hard by high energy
prices and our planning rules.
>> I take your point about certainly about
energy prices and planning rules. Many
people are having the same discussions
here to my mind and Tracy mentioned the
fairly small population. Scale is
incredibly important.
>> Still that small. I mean 17 million.
>> Okay. Okay. Okay. Well, you know, China
has however hundreds of millions just in
the manufacturing. But yes, I take your
point. Not that small. But did Brexit
harm scale capacity? Because to my mind,
if we're thinking about, okay, mass
production at efficient level so that
it's like genuinely competitive, so that
it's not some sort of, you know,
government subsidized albatross that
just exists as a makework industry. It
strikes me that sheer scale of market is
very important and it feels to me like
Brexit has shrunk the scale of that
market for the
>> I mean, there's no there's no evidence
that exports to Europe have gone down
after Brexit. And in fact, you know, the
different trade deal we got from the EU
presents the UK with some opportunities
because we have lower tariffs in some
areas with the United States than the EU
does. But I think the other big factor
in manufacturing is so much of it is
becoming automated
>> that it makes economic sense for goods
to be produced close to market because
you're no longer getting the advantage
of a massive labor cost differential.
So, I think it's it's just a natural
progression of modern economies that
more manufacturing is going to be done
closer to home when you've got a much
more automated process.
>> Since we're talking trade and exports,
uh the UK was one of the first
countries, I think, to sign an agreement
with the Trump administration on
tariffs. Would you have signed that so
quickly or would you have perhaps uh
pushed back a little bit more given, you
know, your emphasis on boosting
manufacturing domestically within the
UK? I did actually praise Kier Stalmer
for the deal at the time. I was one of
the few people to praise it and I said
because I've got experience of
negotiating with the first Trump
administration, Bob Lighheiser. So I
know how difficult it is and I thought
the UK got a good deal and so it has
proven that the EU is actually got a
worse deal than the UK got. So I thought
he was right. He was right to do that.
>> Why is that? And I want to see
>> well we are paying lower tariffs than
the EU is.
>> So just on a relative basis compared to
others on an absolute basis you're still
paying tariffs.
>> Yes. But what Trump has done with the
with all of his trade deals around the
world is essentially reset the World
Trade Organization. I think it was one
of the biggest errors that of American
for foreign policy when Clinton allowed
China to join the World Trade
Organization on developing country terms
and that has had a in my view a it's
helped boost China's economy. China is
an autocratic authoritarian regime. I
think that was a a disastrous policy.
What Trump is trying to do is reset
that. And that has inevitable
consequences for all of America's
trading partners. But knowing what I do
about the Trump administration, I
thought the deal Kiss Armor got was a
good deal.
>> Potentially one thing that could um
>> and I don't praise him very often, by
the way. I figured praise him.
>> I figured that's rare. Um, one thing
that theoretically could be done to
lower energy prices for in many places
would be a resolution of the war in
Ukraine. And I'm curious what when you
look at either Trump's pursuits or what
Kirst has said, do you see other paths?
Were you the prime minister now, what
would you be pushing for in that
particular conflict?
>> Well, I want what I want out of that
conflict is I want Putin not to have
been rewarded for his appalling invasion
of Ukraine. So what we don't want is him
or indeed Xi Jinping to get the signal
from the resolution of the Ukraine
conflict that this was a this invasion
was somehow justified or worth it. I
want Russia to be
contained because I still believe that
they have expansionist instincts.
Just going back to the mini budget for a
second, one of the components of that
was government support to offset higher
energy prices. And that was also one of
the things that seemed to spook markets.
This idea that the UK government would
be fiscally on the hook to compensate
for astronomical energy prices at the
time that seemed to be expanding at an
enormous rate. If you were going to do
it all over again, would you have
possibly included some sort of mechanism
to maybe limit the cost or, you know,
avoid the sense that the UK was
basically bailing out its population in
some way?
>> It's important to note that the energy
package was one thing that wasn't
reversed. So, that was not the policy.
The policy that I was forced to res
reversed now was made pretty clear to me
pretty much you know through threats was
the corporation tax increase. The energy
policy remained in place. The energy
policy remained in place. And the point
about the energy policy was it was not a
subsidy that happened automatically. It
was only when energy prices reached a
certain level. And I believed it was
right for the government to do that
because the government had failed to
ensure
adequately cheap energy was supplied.
But what I was doing in tandem with that
policy of essentially ensuring people
against very high energy prices was
getting on with fracking,
licensing new North Sea gas reserves so
the prices would never get that high. So
it was an insurance against prices going
high to give consumers and businesses
confidence to invest whilst we sorted
out the supply that had been so badly
failed by previous governments. That was
the intention of the policy. And as I've
said, the policy wasn't reversed by my
successor. The policy that was reversed
was getting on with the fracking. So you
had the energy insurance policy, but not
the fracking policy. Those policies were
designed in tandem so that we can make
sure that businesses in the country
weren't spooked by the threats of having
skyhigh energy prices. And by the way,
if the energy prices had got that high,
there would have had to be some kind of
package to deal with them. Anyway, what
I was doing is giving people notice so
they had the confidence to invest. The
energy package was actually announced
because very sadly her majesty the queen
died. It was announced a few weeks
beforehand. It wasn't announced at the
time of the mini budget. The thing that
the the economic establishment really
objected to in the mini budget was the
taxes. It was the you know, it was not
raising corporation tax. That's what
they didn't like.
>> I just have one last question. You know,
Tracy and I work in public, though not
as public as having been the prime
minister of the UK.
We live in this age where people, you
know, stories go insane and people love
to see someone publicly humiliated. And
it just seems to me that the UK press in
particular is a bunch of jackals. But
that's just my impression over here,
even relative to the press over.
>> It's always funny when Americans come
over and they don't realize what they're
like. And I'm like, you ain't seen
nothing until you've dealt with the UK
press. And they always go, Liz, you were
right. You were right about these
people.
>> No, I just see in the headlines. I It's
I don't know. It seems obvious to me.
What's your le takeaway? How do you move
past a period of one's life like that?
>> Well, I don't really see it like that. I
just see that the British press needs to
change. And I'm a big supporter of
independent media. I think the British
press's coverage of economics is
appalling. I think their coverage of
politics is skin deep. I don't think
they've done anything to analyze the
sort of failings of the British state.
And
you know I think there won't be serious
we don't just need to change the
bureaucracy in this country. We need to
deal and change the press and you know
people are now turning off the BBC. You
know they're turning off the mainstream
media because they can see that the
truth isn't being told. And you know
there used to be a golden age I guess in
journalism where people cared about the
truth. I'm afraid they don't now.
friends of mine who are journalists just
say their editorial conferences about
how many clicks their article gets and
it's, you know, I just think that's
pathetic.
>> Well, these are the tensions of being a
journalist in modern times. But I have
one more question. It's just going back
to um some technical aspects, I guess,
of economic policy. So you've criticized
the OBR for you know its forecasts that
end up influencing or you know perhaps
even dictating government policy. I
guess my question is, you know, when you
think about a progrowth economic agenda,
that also relies on forecasts about
future growth. And when we talked to uh
Steven Myron from the Trump
administration earlier this year, that
was one takeaway from our conversation
was how much the Trump administration
was really betting on economic growth
picking up in order to offset some of
the stuff it was doing.
>> It's the only strategy. It is the only
strategy. But why should people have
confidence in the growth forecast but
not have confidence in you know OBR
forecasts? But the point about the OBR,
and this has been proven by history, is
that they overestimate how much raising
taxes will bring in in revenue because
they don't take a full the full account
of the depression in economic activity
and they underestimate
the impact of supply side reforms like
planning or fracking or whatever else.
And
you know, there are two answers to this.
One is
there are better economists out there
and I think the government as was the
case prior to 2010 the government should
have the ability to hire the economists
that you know they believe are right you
know I don't think my homework should be
marked by somebody who doesn't agree
with me which was what was happening I
think that's just wrong if people don't
like what I'm saying and they don't like
the policies they can vote me out at an
election But I wasn't even allowed to
try the policies because the people
marking my homework said no. I mean,
that's the bottom line. But the second
thing is I think we're far too reliant
on forecasts. You can't predict the
future. And trying to say, which is what
the UK system does, that five years out
we know exactly what the debt is going
to be is rubbish. You know, we don't
know what if Donald Trump imposes huge
tariffs. What if the UK strikes a trade
deal with India? You know, what if
there's a discovery of a new technology
that totally transform? You don't know
what the future's going to look like.
And my economics is based on first
principles. I know that if you put up
taxes too high, people won't go out to
work anymore. I know that if you make
energy prices cheaper, businesses are
more likely to invest in Britain. The
problem with these forecasts, and this
is another criticism of British economic
media, the problem with forecasts is
that people become focused on whether
the numbers right in the forecast rather
than the fundamental principles of what
makes a successful economy.
>> Liz Truss, so great to chat with you.
Someone we've wanted to have on the show
for a very long time. Great that we've
made it happen and appreciate you coming
on up.
>> Thank you.
[Music]
Tracy, I'm so glad we finally got to
interview Liz Trust.
>> We finally did it. I think it was a good
time to do it actually because there's,
you know, there's a lot of overlap with
the Trump administration at the moment
and what Truss experienced in 2022.
>> Yeah. Yeah. No, I mean there was a lot
that I found to be interesting there.
You know what I think actually maybe the
most interesting thing to me is thinking
that okay in the US we have these
multiple branches of government right so
the president wants something but
congress is going to veto it or can veto
it especially if it's a different party
in power obviously that's not the
dynamic of the UK with a parliamentary
system and yet even in the parliamentary
system to hear this trust describe the
fact that what she describes as even
modest cuts to the increase in welfare
weren't palatable to the members of her
party let alone the opposition which of
course is never going to vote for but in
her party I find that to be a very
striking comment about the difficulty
that you know electoral democracies have
in reigning back cuts.
>> Oh absolutely. The other thing that kind
of caught my eye or my ear was when we
were talking about tariffs and you know
uh Liz said that she had praised um the
deal that the UK struck with the Trump
administration because it was less than
what the EU was paying. And it's
interesting to me that like countries
seem to be competing with each other.
You know, the Trump administration in
some respects has been kind of
successful in that getting its trade
partners to compete with each other for
the lowest deal rather than to, you
know, try to compete on an absolute
basis for lower tariffs per se. I
thought that was interesting. I also
think it's uh interesting you know this
sort of I find myself having a lot of
sympathy with this this sort of like
anti-democratic aspects of entities like
the OBR or in the US the OM and these
idea that okay they have one set of
assumptions about how policy works and
the idea that like they have a formal
role and you know there's there is a
certain undemocratic element I think of
these sort of institutions that either
they not necessarily with a formal veto,
etc. that aren't elected. I have
sympathy for that opinion.
>> It certainly seems like they can act as
an institutional restraint on the
government, but some people would argue
that maybe that's a good thing.
>> No, right. Like today,
>> an independent body looking at economic
policy and monetary policy, right?
>> Yeah. I mean, that's the thing. And
look, it's very striking that she said
really she does not accept the premise
that the Bank of England should be as
independent as it currently is. and that
you know the idea as you to your
question folding it back in with the
treasury is very striking.
>> Well, also the line about you know not
wanting to have her homework marked by
someone who doesn't believe in it. I'm
sure all of us as students would have
liked to choose our own teacher who was
grading our homework, but we don't get
to for obvious reasons.
>> We don't.
>> Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Wisenthal. You can follow me
at the stalwart. Follow our guest Liz
Truss. She's trust Liz. Follow our
producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Arman Dashelobel Bennett at Dashbot and
Kalebrooks at Kalebrooks. For more
OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots.
We have a daily newsletter and all of
our episodes. You can chat about all of
these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we dive into British politics and
economic policy, then please leave us a
positive review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes absolutely adree.
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]
I know.